The overall goal is to reduce spacecraft weight. volume, and cost by on(cid:173) line adaptive non-linear control of flexible structural components. The  objective of this effort is to develop an  adaptive Neural Network (NN)  controller for the Ball C-Side 1m x 3m antenna with embedded actuators  and the RAMS  sensor system.  A traditional  optimal controller for  the  major modes  is provided perturbations  by  the  NN  to compensate  for  unknown residual modes. On-line training of recurrent and feed-forward  NN  architectures  have  achieved  adaptive  vibration  control  with  unknown  modal  variations and  noisy  measurements.  On-line training  feedback to each actuator NN output is computed via Newton's method  to reduce the difference between desired and achieved antenna positions. 
1  ADAPTIVE  CONTROL  BACKGROUND  The two traditional approaches to adaptive control are 1) direct control (such as perfonned  in direct model reference adaptive controllers) and 2) indirect control (such as performed by  explicit self-tuning regulators).  Direct control techniques (e.g. model-reference adaptive  cootrul) provide good stability however are susceptible to noise. Whereas indirect control  techn;'q~es (e.g.  explicit self-tuning  regulators)  have low  noise susceptibility  and good  convergence rate.  However they require more control effort and have worse stability and  are less roblistto mismodeling. NNs synergistically augment traditional adaptive control  techniques  by  providing  improved mismodeling  robustness both adaptively on-line for  time-varying dynamics as well as in a learned control mode at a slower rate. 
The NN control approaches which correspond to direct and indirect adaptive control are  commonly known as inverse and forward modeling. respectively. More specifically, aNN  which maps the plant state and its desired perfonnance to the control command is called  an inverse model, a NN mapping both the current plant state and control to the next state  and its performance is called the forward model. 
When given a desired performwce and the current state. the inverse model generates the  control. see Figure 1. The actual perfonnance is observed and is used to  train/update the  inverse model. A significant problem occurs when the desired and achieved perfonnance  differ greatly  since the  model  near  the desired  slate  is  not changed.  This condition  is  corrected by  adding random noise to  the control outputs  so as to  extend the state  space