In  this paper  we  present  a  new  version  of the standard  multilayer  perceptron  (MLP) algorithm for  the state-of-the-art in neural net(cid:173) work VLSI implementations:  the Intel Ni1000.  This new version of  the  MLP  uses  a fundamental property of high dimensional spaces  which  allows  the  12-norm  to  be  accurately  approximated  by  the  It -norm.  This  approach  enables  the  standard  MLP  to  utilize  the  parallel architecture of the Ni1000 to achieve on the order of 40000,  256-dimensional classifications per second. 
1  The Intel NilOOO  VLSI Chip 
The Nestor/Intel radial basis function  neural chip (Ni1000) contains the equivalent  of  1024  256-dimensional  artificial  digital  neurons  and can  perform  at  least  40000  classifications  per  second  [Sullivan, 1993].  To attain  this  great  speed,  the  Ni1000  was  designed  to  calculate  "city  block"  distances  (Le.  the  II-norm)  and  thus  to  avoid the large  number  of multiplication units that  would be required  to calculate  Euclidean dot  products in  parallel.  Each  neuron calculates the city block distance  between  its stored weights and the current  input: 
neuron  activity = L IWi  - :eil 
(1)  where  w,  is  the  neuron's stored  weight  for  the  ith  input  and  :ei  is  the  ith  input.  Thus the Nil000 is ideally suited to perform both the RCE [Reillyet al.,  1982]  and 
748 
Michael P.  Perrone.  Leon N.  Cooper 
PRCE  [Scofield et al.,  1987]  algorithms or  any of the  other  commonly used  radial  basis function  (RBF) algorithms.  However,  dot products are central in the calcula(cid:173) tions performed by most neural network algorithms (e.g.  MLP, Cascade Correlation,  etc.).  Furthermore, for  high dimensional data, the dot product becomes the compu(cid:173) tation bottleneck (i.e.  most ofthe network's time is spent calculating dot products).  If the  dot  product  can  not  be  performed in  parallel  there  will  be  little  advantage  using  the  NilOOO  for  such  algorithms.  In  this  paper,  we  address  this  problem  by  showing  that  we  can  extend  the  NilOOO  to  many of the  standard  neural  network  algorithms by  representing  the  Euclidean  dot  product  as  a  function  of Euclidean  norms and by then using a  city block norm approximation to the  Euclidean norm.  Section  2,  introduces  the  approximate dot  productj  Section  3  describes  the  City  Block  MLP  which  uses  the  approximate dot  productj  and  Section  4  presents  ex(cid:173) periments which demonstrate that the City Block  MLP performs well on the  NIST  OCR data and on human face  recognition data. 
2  Approximate  Dot  Product 
Consider  the following approximation [Perrone,  1993]: 
1