Harmony  networks  have  been  proposed  as  a  means by  which  con(cid:173) nectionist  models can perform symbolic computation.  Indeed,  pro(cid:173) ponents claim that a harmony network can be built that constructs  parse trees for strings in  a context free  language.  This paper shows  that  harmony  networks  do  not  work  in  the  following  sense:  they  construct  many outputs that are  not valid  parse  trees. 
In order to show  that the notion of systematicity is compatible with connectionism,  Paul  Smolensky,  Geraldine  Legendre  and  Yoshiro  Miyata  (Smolensky,  Legendre,  and  Miyata  1992;  Smolen sky  1993;  Smolen sky,  Legendre,  and  Miyata  1994)  pro(cid:173) posed a mechanism, "Harmony Theory,"  by which connectionist models purportedly  perform  structure  sensitive  operations  without  implementing classical  algorithms.  Harmony theory  describes  a  "harmony network"  which,  in the course of reaching a  stable equilibrium, apparently computes parse trees  that are valid according to the  rules  of a  particular context-free grammar. 
Harmony  networks  consist  of four  major  components  which  will  be  explained  in  detail in  Section  1.  The four  components are, 
Tensor Representation:  A means to interpret the activation vector of a  connec(cid:173)
tionist system as  a  parse  tree for  a string in a  context-free  language. 
Harmony:  A  function  that  maps all  possible  parse trees  to the  non-positive inte(cid:173)
gers so that a  parse tree is  valid  if and only if its harmony is  zero. 
Energy:  A  function  that  maps  the  set  of activation  vectors  to  the  real  numbers 
and which  is  minimized by  certain  connectionist  networks!. 
Recursive Construction:  A system for  determining  the weight  matrix of a  con(cid:173)
nectionist  network  so  that if its  activation  vector  is  interpreted  as  a  parse 
1 Smolensky,  Legendre and Miyata use the term  "harmony"  to refer to both energy and  harmony.  To distinguish  between them, we  will  use the term that is often used  to describe  the Lyapunov  function  of dynamic  systems,  "energy"  (see for  example  Golden  1986).