Dynamic  Programming,  Q-Iearning  and  other  discrete  Markov  Decision  Process  solvers  can be -applied to continuous d-dimensional state-spaces  by  quantizing the state space into an array of boxes.  This is often problematic  above  two dimensions:  a  coarse  quantization can lead  to poor policies, and  fine  quantization is too expensive.  Possible solutions are variable-resolution  discretization,  or function  approximation  by  neural  nets.  A  third option,  which  has  been  little  studied  in  the  reinforcement  learning  literature,  is  interpolation on  a  coarse  grid.  In  this  paper we  study  interpolation tech(cid:173) niques  that  can  result  in  vast  improvements in  the  online  behavior of the  resulting  control  systems:  multilinear  interpolation,  and  an  interpolation  algorithm  based  on  an  interesting  regular  triangulation  of d-dimensional  space.  We  adapt  these  interpolators  under  three  reinforcement  learning  paradigms:  (i)  offline value iteration with  a  known  model,  (ii)  Q-Iearning,  and  (iii)  online  value  iteration  with  a  previously  unknown  model  learned  from data.  We  describe empirical results,  and the resulting implications for  practical learning of continuous non-linear dynamic control. 
1  GRID-BASED INTERPOLATION TECHNIQUES  Reinforcement  learning algorithms generate functions  that map states to  "cost-t
•  Fine grids may be used  in one or two dimensions.  Above  two dimensions,  fine  grids  are  too expensive.  Value  functions  can  be  discontinuous,  which  (as we will see) can lead to su boptimalities even with very fine  discretization  in two dimensions . 
•  Neural  nets have  been  used  in conjunction  with TD  [Sutton,  1988]  and  Q-Iearning [Watkins,  1989]  in very  high dimensional spaces [Tesauro,  1991,  Crites  and  Barto,  1996].  While promising, it  is  not  always  clear  that they  produce  the  accurate  value  functions  that  might  be  needed  for  fine  near(cid:173) optimal control of dynamic systems, and the most commonly used  methods  of applying value  iteration or policy iteration with a  neural-net  value func(cid:173) tion are often unstable.  [Boyan  and  Moore,  1995].