I  present  an  expectation-maximization  (EM)  algorithm  for  principal  component analysis (PCA). The algorithm allows a few eigenvectors and  eigenvalues to  be extracted from  large collections of high dimensional  data.  It is computationally very efficient in space and time.  It also natu(cid:173) rally accommodates missing infonnation.  I also introduce a new variant  of PC A called sensible principal component analysis (SPCA) which de(cid:173) fines a proper density model in the data space. Learning for SPCA is also  done with an EM algorithm.  I report results on synthetic and real data  showing that these EM algorithms correctly and efficiently find the lead(cid:173) ing eigenvectors of the covariance of datasets in a few iterations using up  to hundreds of thousands of datapoints in thousands of dimensions. 
1  Why EM for peA?  Principal component analysis (PCA) is a widely used dimensionality reduction technique in  data analysis.  Its popularity comes from three important properties.  First, it is the optimal  (in tenns of mean squared error) linear scheme for compressing a set of high dimensional  vectors into a set of lower dimensional vectors and then reconstructing. Second, the model  parameters  can  be  computed directly  from  the  data - for  example  by diagonalizing the  sample covariance.  Third, compression and decompression are easy operations to perfonn  given the model parameters - they require only matrix multiplications. 
Despite these attractive features however, PCA models have several shortcomings.  One is  that naive methods for finding the principal component directions have trouble with high  dimensional data or large numbers of datapoints.  Consider attempting to  diagonalize the  sample covariance matrix of n vectors in a space of p dimensions when n and p are several  hundred or several thousand. Difficulties can arise both in the fonn of computational com(cid:173) plexity and also data scarcity. I  Even computing the sample covariance itself is very costly,  requiring 0 (np2)  operations. In general it is best to avoid altogether computing the sample 
• rowei s@cns . cal tech. edu; Computation & Neural Systems, California Institute of Tech.  IOn the data scarcity front,  we often do not have enough data in high dimensions for the sample  covariance to be of full rank and so we must be careful to employ techniques which do not require full  rank matrices.  On the complexity front,  direct diagonalization of a  symmetric matrix thousands  of  rows in size can be extremely costly since this operation is O(P3) for p x p inputs.  Fortunately, several  techniques exist for efficient matrix diagonalization when only the first few leading eigenvectors and  eigerivalues are required (for example the power method [10] which is only O(p2». 
EM Algorithms for PCA and SPCA 
627 
covariance explicitly. Methods such as the snap-shot algorithm [7] do this by assuming that  the eigenvectors being searched for are linear combinations of the datapoints;  their com(cid:173) plexity is O(n 3 ).  In this note,  I present a version of the expectation-maximization (EM)  algorithm [1] for learning the principal components of a dataset. The algorithm does not re(cid:173) quire computing the sample covariance and has a complexity limited by 0 (knp) operations  where k  is the number of leading eigenvectors to be learned. 
Another shortcoming of standard approaches to PCA is that it is not obvious how to deal  properly with missing data.  Most of the  methods discussed above cannot accommodate  missing  values  and so  incomplete points must either be discarded or completed using a  variety of ad-hoc interpolation methods.  On the other hand,  the  EM algorithm for  PCA  enjoys all  the benefits  [4]  of other EM algorithms in tenns of estimating  the  maximum  likelihood values for missing infonnation directly at each iteration. 
Finally, the PCA model itself suffers from a critical flaw which is independent of the tech(cid:173) nique used to compute its parameters:  it does not define a proper probability model in the  space of inputs. This is because the density is not nonnalized within the principal subspace.  In other words,  if we perfonn PCA on some data and then ask how well new data are  fit  by the model,  the only criterion used is  the  squared distance of the new data  from  their  projections into the principal subspace.  A  datapoint far away from the training data but  nonetheless near the principal subspace will be assigned a high "pseudo-likelihood" or low  error.  Similarly, it is not possible to generate "fantasy" data from a PCA model. In this note  I introduce a new model called sensible principal component analysis (SPCA), an obvious  modification of PC A, which does define a proper covariance structure in the data space. Its  parameters can also be learned with an EM algorithm, given below. 
In summary,  the methods developed in this paper provide three advantages.  They allow  simple and efficient computation of a few eigenvectors and eigenvalues when working with  many datapoints in high dimensions. They permit this computation even in the presence of  missing data.  On a real vision problem with missing infonnation, I have computed the 10  leading eigenvectors and eigenvalues of 217 points in 212  dimensions in a few hours using  MATLAB on a modest workstation. Finally, through a small variation, these methods allow  the computation not only of the principal subspace but of a complete Gaussian probabilistic  model which allows one to generate data and compute true likelihoods. 
2  Whence EM for peA?  Principal component analysis can be viewed as a limiting case of a particular class of linear(cid:173) Gaussian models.  The goal of such models is to capture the covariance structure of an ob(cid:173) served p-dimensional variable y  using fewer than the p{p+ 1) /2 free parameters required in  a full covariance matrix. Linear-Gaussian models do this by assuming that y  was produced  as a  linear transfonnation of some k-dimensionallatent variable x  plus additive Gaussian  noise.  Denoting the transfonnation by the p  x  k  matrix C, and the ~dimensional) noise  by v  (with covariance matrix R) the generative model can be written  as