We  introduce  a  novel  framework  for  simultaneous  structure  and  parameter  learning  in  hidden-variable conditional probability models,  based on an  en tropic  prior and  a solution  for its maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimator.  The MAP estimate minimizes uncertainty  in  all  respects:  cross-entropy  between  model  and  data;  entropy  of the  model ;  entropy  of  the  data's  descriptive  statistics.  Iterative  estimation  extinguishes  weakly  supported  parameters,  compressing and  sparsifying  the  model.  Trimming operators  accelerate  this  process  by  removing  excess  parameters  and,  unlike  most  pruning  schemes,  guarantee  an  increase  in  posterior  probability.  Entropic  estimation  takes  a  overcomplete  random  model  and simplifies  it,  inducing the  structure of relations  between  hidden  and  observed  variables.  Applied  to  hidden  Markov  models  (HMMs),  it  finds  a  concise  finite-state  machine  representing  the  hidden  structure  of a  signal.  We  entropically  model  music,  handwriting, and video time-series, and show that the resulting models are highly concise,  structured,  predictive,  and  interpretable:  Surviving  states  tend  to  be  highly  correlated  with meaningful partitions of the data, while surviving transitions provide a low-perplexity  model of the signal dynamics. 
1  . An entropic prior  In  entropic  estimation  we  seek to  maximize  the  information  content of parameters.  For  conditional  probabilities,  parameters  values  near  chance  add  virtually  no  information  to  the  model,  and  are  therefore  wasted  degrees  of  freedom.  In  contrast,  parameters  near  the  extrema  {O, I}  are  informative  because  they  impose  strong  constr·aints  on  the  class  of signals  accepted  by  the  model.  In  Bayesian  terms,  our  prior should  assert  that  parameters that do not reduce uncertainty are improbable.  We  can capture this intuition in  a surprisingly simple form:  For a model of N  conditional probabilities 9  = {(h , . . . , () N  }  we write 
(1) 
whence we can  see that the prior measures a model's freedom from ambiguity (H(9) is an  entropy measure).  Applying Pe (.)  to a multinomial yields the posterior 
p  (LlI)  P(wI9)Pe (9)  e  U  W