I  describe  a  framework  for  interpreting Support  Vector  Machines  (SVMs)  as  maximum  a  posteriori  (MAP)  solutions  to  inference  problems with Gaussian Process priors.  This can provide intuitive  guidelines  for  choosing  a  'good'  SVM  kernel.  It  can  also  assign  (by  evidence  maximization)  optimal values  to parameters such  as  the noise level C which cannot be determined unambiguously from  properties of the MAP  solution alone  (such as  cross-validation er(cid:173) ror) . I illustrate this using a simple approximate expression for the  SVM  evidence.  Once  C  has  been determined,  error bars on SVM  predictions can also  be obtained. 
1  Support  Vector Machines:  A  probabilistic framework 
Support  Vector  Machines  (SVMs)  have  recently  been  the  subject  of  intense  re(cid:173) search  activity  within  the  neural  networks  community;  for  tutorial  introductions  and overviews of recent developments see  [1,  2,  3].  One of the open questions that  remains is  how  to set the 'tunable' parameters of an SVM  algorithm:  While meth(cid:173) ods for  choosing the width of the kernel function and the noise parameter C  (which  controls  how  closely  the  training  data  are  fitted)  have  been  proposed  [4,  5]  (see  also, very recently,  [6]), the effect of the overall shape of the kernel function remains  imperfectly understood [1].  Error bars  (class probabilities) for  SVM  predictions - important for safety-critical applications, for example - are also difficult to obtain.  In this paper I suggest that a probabilistic interpretation of SVMs  could be used to  tackle these problems.  It shows that the SVM  kernel defines  a  prior over functions  on the input space, avoiding the need to think in terms of high-dimensional feature  spaces.  It also allows one to define quantities such as the evidence  (likelihood) for a  set of hyperparameters (C,  kernel amplitude Ko  etc).  I give a simple approximation  to the  evidence  which  can  then  be  maximized  to set  such  hyperparameters.  The  evidence is sensitive to the values of C and Ko individually, in contrast to properties  (such  as  cross-validation  error)  of the  deterministic  solution,  which  only  depends  on the product  CKo.  It can thfrefore be used  to  assign an unambiguous  value  to  C, from  which  error bars can be derived. 
350